---
ImportedOn: "Thursday, February 16, 2023 6:10:23 PM"
Category: "eMRD"
Tags:
  - "Category/eMRD"
parent:
  - "C07 Additional Rules"
up:
  - "C07 Additional Rules"
prev:
  - "Spell Rarity"
next:
  - "Movement"
RWtopicId: "Topic_17945"
---
# Possession
## Overview
Rather than introducing new rules, this section explains the nuances of possession magic, as used in the new *possession* spell (*Occult Adventures* 181), as well as monster abilities and other spells. 

**WHAT IS POSSESSION?** 

True possession is when a creature displaces or overrides the target’s consciousness with its own, establishing direct control over the target’s body. The Pathfinder RPG features several effects that are often conf lated with possession. The section below describes several possession and possession-like effects and the differences between them. 

**Domination**: Dominate spells are often confused with possession, as they produce superficially similar outcomes. However, domination and possession are not the same. Domination is mind-control, enslaving the target’s mind and forcing it to carry out the caster’s will; thus, the caster doesn’t directly control the target’s body. The target’s dominated mind merely carries out a mandate given by the caster with the means, knowledge, and experience it has available. 

**Spell Possession**: Prior to *Occult Adventures*, the primary source for possession mechanics in the Pathfinder RPG was the *[[Magic Jar (Spell)|magic jar]]* spell. *[[Magic Jar (Spell)|Magic jar]]* allows the caster to detach her soul from her body and place it in the body of another creature, displacing the host’s soul and leaving the caster’s own body essentially “empty.” Like *possession*, these effects belong to the necromancy school of magic, as befits magic that manipulates life force and souls. This is true possession, as the end result is control of the host’s body rather than the mind. The *marionette possession* spell (*Pathfinder RPG Ultimate Magic* 228) operates under an identical principle, but does not displace the host’s soul because the target cedes control to the caster willingly. 

These forms of possession carry great risk for the caster. The caster has no means of survival without a body to inhabit, so if her soul is ejected from the host’s body while her own body is out of the spell’s range, the caster dies instantly. 

The *possession* spell presented in this book follows similar rules to *[[Magic Jar (Spell)|magic jar]]* and *marionette possession*, but with a few key differences. *Possession* does not displace the host soul when the possessor seizes control of a creature’s body. Additionally, the caster does not perish instantly if her body is outside the spell’s range when she is ejected; the range on the *possession* spell pertains only to the distance the caster can be from her intended target at the time of casting. Once ejected, the caster’s soul snaps back to her body from any distance, so long as it remains on the same plane. 

**Incorporeal Possession**: Ghosts, shadow demons, and similar creatures do not possess physical bodies— they are simply disembodied souls. They use the rules below to govern the interaction between their mental characteristics and their hosts’ physical forms. Such a creature merges with the host’s body and is unharmed when ejected. Creatures that use *[[Magic Jar (Spell)|magic jar]]* can often use the new *possession* spell instead. 

**CORE MECHANIC AND CLARIFICATION** 

The *possession* spell contains the core mechanics for possession. The description of the *[[Magic Jar (Spell)|magic jar]]* spell states the possessing creature can use her “mental abilities,” and the *possession* spell works similarly. This term wasn’t previously defined, and has been a source of confusion in many games. The term “mental abilities” as used here refers to the following. 

- The possessor uses her skill ranks, along with any feats the possessor has for which she still qualifies in the host’s body. The possessor doesn’t gain any of the host’s feats or skill ranks, but does apply bonuses and penalties associated with the host’s body. For example, when attempting [[Fly (Skill)|Fly]] checks, a character who possessed a bird would use her own ranks in the [[Fly (Skill)|Fly]] skill, but the bird’s Dexterity modifier and racial, size, and maneuverability bonuses. 
- The possessor can use spells and spell-like abilities. Appropriate spell components and foci are still required for spells that call for them. Some spell-like abilities are racial in nature, but the soul’s essence temporarily instills the possessing creature’s quintessential nature into the host’s body. For instance, a shadow demon possessing a paladin can still use its racial spell-like abilities during that time. 
- The possessor can use nonmagical and magical class abilities such as domain, hex, rage, and school powers. 

Supernatural abilities (with the exception of class abilities) are not considered mental abilities, as they generally rely upon a creature’s physical form. For example, a red dragon possessing a cleric of Iomedae could not use its breath weapon ability to breathe fire while inhabiting the cleric’s form. The GM can choose to make a specific exception if she believes an ability is solely mental in nature. 

**RULE INTERACTIONS** 

Several different mechanics allow a creature to influence or control another creature, and sometimes it isn’t clear how these competing effects should play out, whether it be possession versus compulsion or even possession versus possession. These systems interact in the following ways. 

**Possession versus Charm and Compulsion**: Possession overrides charms and compulsions that are in control of another creature. Neither type of effect prevents the other from functioning, but possession bypasses the mind and takes direct physical control of the body—which may result in a possessor enslaving an intelligence that is essentially helpless already because of a compulsion. Compulsion and charm effects move with the mind or soul of the creature originally targeted. For example, if you cast *mind swap* (*Occult Adventures*  177) on a dominated creature, the domination effect remains active but transfers with the originally dominated mind to its new host body, and a dominated creature capable of possession could possess another creature while still remaining dominated. 

If the host’s mind or soul is not displaced from the body, a dominating creature can still telepathically interact with its now-possessed target, even though the target is helpless within its own hijacked body. The dominating creature can even command the target to explain what the host body is doing, if the host has access to its senses. 

Conversely, a caster can target a possessing creature with a compulsion or charm effect. If the possessing creature is the only mind or soul in the host body, the compulsion or charm effect works on the possessing creature normally. If the possessing creature is later evicted from the body, the compulsion or charm effect remains active on the possessing creature when it returns to its original body. For instance, if a mesmerist is using *mind swap* on a bard, and a succubus uses her *[[Dominate Monster (Spell)|dominate monster]]* spell-like ability when she meets the possessed bard, the mesmerist must attempt a saving throw against the spell. If he fails, the mesmerist becomes dominated by the succubus, and when his possession ends and he returns to his body, he remains at the mercy of his new mistress. 

When both the host creature and a possessing creature occupy a body at the same time, a charm or compulsion effect can target either one. However, the caster must be aware of the possessing creature’s presence in the host body in order to target it. Otherwise, the effect targets the host by default, generally with limited effect. 

**Possession versus Divination Effects**: Possession does nothing to obfuscate or block most divination spells. For example, if an evil mesmerist is possessing a paladin, *[[Detect Evil (Spell)|detect evil]]* will sense the presence of an evil creature when the paladin’s body enters the area of effect. The Hidden Presence feat can assist a possessing creature in foiling divinations. If a creature’s body and soul are in two different locations, as in the case of a caster of *[[Magic Jar (Spell)|magic jar]]*, divination spells that depend on location, such as *[[Locate Creature (Spell)|locate creature]]* or *[[Scrying (Spell)|scrying]]*, fail to produce results. The exception is *[[Discern Location (Spell)|discern location]]*; this powerful spell provides both locations unless the body and soul are protected by *[[Mind Blank (Spell)|mind blank]]* or a deity. 

**Possession versus Possession**: If you attempt to possess a creature that is already possessed, the possessing creature must succeed at the *possession* spell’s save or be ejected, allowing you to enter the host. If the possessing creature voluntarily fails its save, first that creature is automatically ejected and then the host attempts the Will save instead. A possession effect that doesn’t allow a saving throw automatically causes the possessing creature to be ejected.

**POSSESSION**

Some fiends with at least 4 Hit Dice and a Charisma score of at least 13 have the spell-like ability to shuck their physical forms and take on an ethereal form that allows them to possess another creature or an object.

The creature’s new form is ethereal and thus immune to even the most potent physical attacks and most magical attacks (except, for example, force attacks) by nonethereal creatures. When a fiend possesses a creature or object, even force effects no longer affect the fiend. Only spells such as *[[Dismissal (Spell)|dismissal]]* can affect the possessing fiend when cast by nonethereal creatures. Any sort of attack, magical or otherwise, directed against the fiend affects the possessed creature or object, however.

While a fiend is in ethereal form, its corporeal body lies senseless, as if in a state of suspended animation. The body does not require food or air, but damage or exposure to an extreme environment will kill it. A fiend can roam ethereally as long as it wants, but an ethereal fiend dies if its body is destroyed, and it instantly returns to its body if *[[Dispel Magic (Spell)|dispel magic]]* (or a similar effect) is successfully cast on the fiend’s body. The caster level for the fiend’s possession ability is equal to the fiend’s Hit Dice. Fiends with the possession ability generally have a Challenge Rating 2 higher than the standard fiends of their kind. For example, a succubus with the possession ability is CR 11.

Once a fiend is on the [[Ethereal Plane]], it generally floats through the world insubstantially, seeking a target to possess. Making a possession attempt is a supernatural ability that a fiend can attempt at will as a standard action.

**POSSESSED CREATURES**

If a fiend wishes to possess a creature, the fiend’s ethereal form must be adjacent to its desired target. A *[[Protection From Evil (Spell)|protection from evil]]* spell (or similar effect) makes a creature immune to possession attempts. An unprotected target of a possession attempt must succeed at a Will saving throw (DC 10 + 1/2 fiend’s HD + fiend’s Cha bonus) to avoid possession. Evil targets of a possession attempt take a –2 circumstance penalty on this saving throw, and target of a possession attempt who is in the middle of committing an evil act takes a further –2 circumstance penalty. Once a creature succeeds at a save against possession, that fiend cannot attempt to possess that creature again for 24 hours. On a failed save, the victim is possessed.

A fiend in possession of a body becomes a part of the victim, aware of what is going on around the creature that they possess. It can see and hear as well as the victim can. A possessing fiend can, at any time, speak mentally to the creature that it possesses in a language that the creature can understand, although if the victim isn’t very intelligent, its understanding may be limited.

A creature possessed by a fiend doesn’t always know that it is possessed. Further, a fiend can attempt to hide its presence within the possessed creature, allowing it to pass through a *[[Magic Circle Against Evil (Spell)|magic circle against evil]]*, enter a *[[Forbiddance (Spell)|forbiddance]]*-warded church, and escape detection by *[[Detect Evil (Spell)|detect evil]]*. To do so, the fiend must make a special “mental” Hide check. This is a Hide check using the fiend’s Intelligence modifier rather than its Dexterity modifier, but which otherwise uses the Hide skill. The Difficulty Class (DC) for the Hide check is 10 + level of the spell + spellcaster’s relevant ability modifier (just like the saving throw for a spell). The fiend gains a +4 circumstance bonus on its [[Stealth (Skill)|Stealth]] (Hide) check if it is not currently controlling the victim. The fiend can also make this Hide check to prevent the possessed creature from taking damage from alignment-based spells such as *[[Holy Smite (Spell)|holy smite]]*. The DC for the Hide check is the same as the saving throw DC for the damaging spell. If the fiend’s [[Stealth (Skill)|Stealth]] (Hide) check fails, the spell affects the possessed creature as if it had the same alignment as the fiend.

Possessing fiends have immediate access to all of their victim’s current thoughts, as the *[[Detect Thoughts (Spell)|detect thoughts]]* spell, except that they automatically read surface thoughts. If desired, a possessing fiend can probe the possessed creature’s memories as well, but the victim is allowed a Will save (DC 10 + 1/2 fiend’s HD + fiend’s Cha bonus). If the save is successful, the victim keeps the fiend out of his or her thoughts for 24 hours. Whether the save succeeds or fails, probing memories automatically reveals the fiend’s presence to the victim.

Physical harm to the possessed creature does not harm the fiend. Killing the possessed victim only forces the fiend back onto the [[Ethereal Plane]], from where it can attempt a new possession; the fiend is unharmed. Not even ethereal creatures can harm a possessing fiend.

A fiend possessing a creature can take one of four roles with respect to its victim: rider, ally, controller, or enemy. The fiend can choose only one role at a time. If a fiend is acting as a controller, it can’t also grant its victim the bonuses it could if the fiend were an ally, for example.

**Rider:** Much of the time, a fiend that possesses a creature simply rides along with the victim, who is usually unaware of the fiend’s presence. The fiend might combine riding with hiding to get into an area protected by *[[Forbiddance (Spell)|forbiddance]]* or slip past a *[[Magic Circle Against Evil (Spell)|magic circle against evil]]* near a target that it could not otherwise approach. As a free action, the possessing fiend can become the ally or controller of the possessed creature. Both of these actions, however, make the fiend’s presence known to the victim (although victims with low Intelligence scores may not understand what is happening to them).

**Ally:** If the possessed creature is aware of the possessing fiend and willing to be its host, the fiend can grant the possessed creature a +4 profane bonus to any single ability score. This bonus is generally granted at the conclusion of some bargaining between the fiend and the possessed creature. The fiend is in control of this bonus and can take it away as a free action if the possessed creature behaves contrary to the fiend’s wishes. If the possessed creature doesn’t do what the fiend wants, the fiend can go from ally to controller or from ally to enemy as a free action. Because the possessor and the possessed can communicate telepathically, they often form an agreement: The bonus is a reward for the possessed creature if it does as the fiend wishes.

**Controller:** In the most feared aspect of possession, a fiend can take a standard action to attempt direct control over the actions of the victim, who struggles to maintain control over his or her own body. The victim must succeed at a Will saving throw every round (DC 10 + 1/2 fiend’s HD + fiend’s Cha modifier, + 1 for each previous failed save against control that day) to avoid losing control. If the victim’s save succeeds, the victim has resisted the fiend, but the fiend can make another control attempt in the next round. Victims struggling against control are considered [[Staggered|staggered]] and can take only partial actions.

If the possessed creature makes three consecutive successful saving throws, then the possessing fiend cannot make further attempts to control the victim that day. The success or failure of the victim’s saving throws against control does not affect the overall possession, however, and the fiend is still possessing the creature.

If the possessed creature fails the Will save against control, the fiend has access to all of the creature’s senses, abilities, skills, feats, and spell knowledge. The fiend now acts as though it is the creature in all respects, until control is lost or it relinquishes control. During this time, the possessed creature can still speak mentally to the fiend and is still privy to all sensory input—unless the possessor takes a standard action to block the possessed creature’s access to the senses. If the fiend wishes, the victim blacks out while the fiend is in charge.

The fiend uses its own Intelligence, Wisdom, and Charisma scores, but it adopts all of the creature’s physical ability scores. Fiends of at least 9 HD and 15 Intelligence that maintain control of a victim for at least 10 rounds a day for seven consecutive days can also draw upon the possessed creature’s spell-like abilities (at the same caster level as the possessed creature). The fiend assumes the victim’s type and is affected by spells and effects as if it were the possessed creature. Thus, a cornugon-possessed wolf is subject to spells affecting animals, even though it is far more intelligent than a normal wolf.

The fiend automatically maintains control for a number of rounds equal to 1/2 the fiend’s HD + the fiend’s Charisma modifier + 1 for each time the fiend has controlled this specific victim. When the fiend’s control lapses, it can attempt to reassert control if it chooses.

Fiends often choose weak-willed creatures to possess, such as golems and other constructs. The construct can make a Will save just as any other creature can to avoid the possession, but it is likely that the possessing fiend can take and retain control, because most constructs have poor Will saves. A fiend possessing a construct can also aid it as described under the ally role, but it must relinquish direct control to do so, and the construct reverts to its prior programming.

**Enemy:** The opposite of an ally, this possessing fiend is a hindrance to a creature it possesses. A possessing fiend usually takes this tactic when it has failed to control its victim or when it is angry with a possessed creature that the fiend was acting as an ally toward. The possessing fiend can grant the victim a –4 profane penalty to any single ability score. The fiend is in control of this penalty and can take it away as a free action, sometimes by working out an agreement with the possessed creature after some telepathic negotiation.

**Source:** Book of Vile Darkness (WotC), pgs. 23-25

**DEMONIC POSSESSION**

Sometimes a fiend with at least 4 Hit Dice and a Charisma score of at least 13 has the supernatural ability to shuck its physical form and take on an incorporeal one that enables it to possess other creatures—or even objects. Its incorporeal form has the immunities normal to that creature subtype (see Monster Manual III 214 for details). When such a fiend possesses a creature or object, even force effects no longer affect it. Only certain spells and abilities can affect a possessing fiend (see Exorcism, page 26, for details). Any other sort of attack—magical or otherwise—directed against the fiend affects the possessed creature or object instead.

While a fiend is in incorporeal form, its corporeal body (assuming it has one) lies senseless, as if in a state of suspended animation. The body does not require food or air, but direct damage or exposure to an extreme environment can kill it. A fiend can roam incorporeally as long as it desires, but it dies if its body is destroyed. If a fiend’s body is attacked or moved while it is in this state, the fiend becomes immediately aware of the tampering and can return to its body as a free action. Furthermore, successfully casting *[[Dispel Magic (Spell)|dispel magic]]* (or a similar effect) on its body forces it to return instantly to that vessel. The caster level for a fiend’s possession ability is equal to its Hit Dice. A fiend with this ability has a Challenge Rating 2 higher than standard fiends of its kind. For example, a succubus with the possession ability is CR 9 rather than CR 7.

A fiend can only move about in its incorporeal state on the plane where its body lies in stasis and the [[Ethereal Plane]]. Thus, a demon using this ability while its body is on a layer of the Abyss cannot possess a creature on the Material Plane. A fiend in this incorporeal form that moves around on its body’s plane has no access to its normal suite of abilities. It has its normal hit points and saving throw bonuses, but it lacks its extraordinary, supernatural, and spell-like abilities.

It does retain its normal suite of melee attacks, but they are made as melee touch attacks, and it does not add its normal Strength bonus on damage rolls (since it has no Strength score while incorporeal). While incorporeal on the [[Ethereal Plane]], it has its full range of special attacks and special qualities, attacks normally, and deals full normal damage. If a fiend’s incorporeal form is destroyed, the creature’s physical form remains in its comalike state for one week while its incorporeal essence reforms. After that time, it either awakens and can resume a normal physical existence, or it can launch its incorporeal form back onto the [[Ethereal Plane]] to seek out yet another host body.

A fiend with the possession ability can move between its body’s plane and the [[Ethereal Plane]] as often as it likes as a free action. Once a fiend is on the [[Ethereal Plane]], it fl oats through the world insubstantially, seeking a target to possess. If it moves to a plane other than the [[Ethereal Plane]] in this form, it is visible, but appears as a ghostly duplicate of its normal physical form. Making a possession attempt is a supernatural ability that the fiend can use at will as a standard action. If a victim successfully resists a possession attempt, it is aware that some outside entity forcibly attempted to gain control of its body, but not the source of the attack.

**POSSESSED CREATURES**

To use its possession ability, a fiend must be adjacent to its desired target and in incorporeal form. A *[[Protection From Evil (Spell)|protection from evil]]* spell (or similar effect) makes any creature immune to possession attempts.

An unprotected target must succeed on a Will saving throw (DC 10 + 1/2 fiend’s HD + fiend’s Cha modifier) to avoid possession. An evil target takes a –2 circumstance penalty on this saving throw, and a target that is actually committing an evil act at the time of the attempt takes a –4 circumstance penalty. The DM can roll the saving throw secretly to prevent a player from knowing whether or not his character has become possessed. Once a creature makes a successful save against possession, that fiend cannot attempt to possess that creature again for 24 hours. On a failed save, the victim is possessed.

A fiend in possession of a body becomes part of the victim. It is aware of what is going on around the creature whose body it possesses and can see and hear as well as its victim can. A possessing fiend can, at any time, speak mentally to the creature it possesses in a language that creature can understand, although if the victim isn’t very intelligent, its comprehension might be limited.

A creature possessed by a fiend doesn’t always know that it is possessed. Furthermore, a fiend can attempt to hide its presence within the possessed creature, so that it can pass through a *[[Magic Circle Against Evil (Spell)|magic circle against evil]]*, enter a *[[Forbiddance (Spell)|forbiddance]]*-warded church, or escape detection by a detect spell or effect. To hide its presence, the fiend must succeed on a special “mental” Hide check using its Intelligence modifier rather than its Dexterity modifier. The DC for this check is 10 + level of the spell from which it wishes to hide + spellcaster’s relevant ability modifier (just like the saving throw DC of a spell). The fiend gains a +4 circumstance bonus on its [[Stealth (Skill)|Stealth]] (Hide) check if it is not currently controlling the victim. A possessing fiend has immediate access to all of its victim’s current thoughts, as though using the *[[Detect Thoughts (Spell)|detect thoughts]]* spell, except that it automatically reads surface thoughts.

If desired, a possessing fiend can probe the possessed creature’s memories as well, but the victim is allowed a Will save (DC 10 + 1/2 fiend’s HD + fiend’s Cha modifier) against this effect. If the save is successful, the victim keeps the fiend out of his thoughts for 24 hours. Whether the save succeeds or fails, probing memories automatically reveals the fiend’s presence to the victim.

Physical harm to the possessed creature does not harm the fiend. Killing the possessed victim forces the fiend’s incorporeal form back onto the [[Ethereal Plane]], but it is unharmed and can attempt a new possession whenever it desires. Not even other inorporeal creatures can harm a possessing fiend.

A fiend possessing a creature can take any one of six roles with respect to its victim: ally, controller, enemy, mutterer, rider, or transformer. The fiend can switch from one role to another as a free action.

**Ally:** If the victim is aware of the possessing fiend and willing to serve as its host, the fiend can grant a +4 profane bonus to any one of the possessed creature’s ability scores. This bonus is granted at the conclusion of a bargaining period between the fiend and the possessed creature (they can communicate telepathically with each other). The fiend is in control of this bonus and can take it away as a free action if the possessed creature fails to act in a desired manner. If the possessed creature continues to disobey the fiend’s instructions, the fiend can go from ally to controller or from ally to enemy as a free action.

**Controller:** In the most feared form of possession, a fiend can take a standard action to attempt direct control over its victim’s actions. The victim must succeed on a Will saving throw every round (DC 10 + 1/2 fiend’s HD + fiend’s Cha modifier + 1 for each previous failed save against control that day) to avoid losing control of its own body.

A successful save indicates that the victim has resisted the fiend, but the fiend can make another control attempt in the next round. A creature struggling against control is [[Staggered|staggered]] and can take only a single action in a round (either a move action or standard action). If the possessed creature makes three consecutive successful saving throws, the possessing fiend can make no further attempts to control it for 24 hours. However, the fiend still possesses the creature, regardless of the success or failure of any saving throws against control.

If the possessed creature fails the Will save against control, the fiend has access to all the creature’s senses, abilities, skills, feats, and spell knowledge. The fiend now acts as though it is the possessed creature in all respects until control is relinquished or lost. During this time, the possessed creature can still communicate mentally with the fiend and receives all sensory input normally, unless the possessor takes a standard action each round to block the possessed creature’s access to its senses. If the fiend wishes, it can cause the victim to lose consciousness as a standard action (no save).

This condition persists as long as the fiend remains in control or until it chooses to return the victim to consciousness (a standard action). While in control, the fiend uses its own Intelligence, Wisdom, and Charisma scores, but it adopts all the possessed creature’s physical ability scores. If a fiend with at least 9 Hit Dice and an Intelligence score of 15 or higher can maintain control for at least 10 rounds per day for seven consecutive days, it can also draw upon the possessed creature’s spelllike abilities and use them at the same caster level as the possessed creature did. The fiend retains the victim’s type and is affected by spells and effects as if it actually were the possessed creature. Thus, a demon-possessed wolf is subject to spells that affect animals, even though it is more intelligent than a normal wolf.

The possessing fiend automatically maintains control of its victim for a number of rounds equal to 1/2 fiend’s HD + fiend’s Cha modifier + 1 for each time the fiend has controlled this specific creature before. When the fiend’s control lapses, it can attempt to reassert control if it chooses.

Fiends often choose weak-willed creatures, such as golems and other constructs, for their possession attempts. A construct can make a Will save just like any other creature to avoid possession, but it is likely that a possessing fiend can take and retain control because most constructs have poor Will save modifiers. A fiend possessing a construct can aid it as described in the ally entry (see above) but must relinquish direct control to do so, allowing the construct to revert to its prior programming.

**Enemy:** The opposite of an ally, this sort of possessor is a serious hindrance to its victim. The possessing fiend usually takes this role after failing to control its victim, or when the victim has made it angry by failing to follow its directives while it was acting as an ally. The possessing fiend can impose a –4 profane penalty to any one of the victim’s ability scores. The fiend is in control of this bonus and can take it away as a free action. Typically, it removes the penalty after working out an agreement with the possessed creature through telepathic negotiations, and it might thereafter revert to an ally (a free action).

**Mutterer:** A mutterer enjoys planting barely perceived whispers in its victim’s mind in an attempt to influence her actions and, with luck, drive her insane. A mutterer has the same characteristics as a rider (see below), except that every so often, the mutterer cajoles, criticizes, warns, or otherwise infl uences its host. These “mutterings” don’t always come in the form of words. Sometimes the demon passes on whatever strong, negative emotion it is experiencing to the victim, causing its host to feel frightened, anxious, angry, or sad without knowing why.

Whenever a character possessed by a mutterer is alone or under extreme stress, the demon might strike (DM’s option). The character receives emotions, advice, or other “mutterings” and might feel the desire to act on them or try to “get them out of his head.” A character plagued by a mutterer must succeed on a Will saving throw (DC 10 + 1/2 fiend’s HD + fiend’s Cha modifier). Failure means the victim must either perform a specific action in response to the demon’s mutterings (DM’s option) or spend a round befuddled, as if under the effect of a *[[Confusion (Spell)|confusion]]* spell. A successful save leaves the victim in control of its mind and actions but does not automatically tip the demon’s hand—the host might still have no idea that it is possessed.

Mutterers often drive their hosts insane, or at least give them the appearance of insanity because they have a difficult time not talking back to the voices in their heads. Creatures playing host to mutterers often appear agitated or exhausted (since some mutterers deprive their hosts of sleep), and many actually develop physical tics.

**Rider:** Much of the time, a possessing fiend simply rides along with its victim, giving no clue as to its presence. The fiend might combine riding with hiding to get into an area protected by *[[Forbiddance (Spell)|forbiddance]]* or slip past a *[[Magic Circle Against Evil (Spell)|magic circle against evil]]* near a target it could not otherwise approach. A fiend in the role of rider might eventually decide to take on the role of ally or controller instead. Doing so makes its presence known to the victim, although a victim with a low Intelligence score might not understand what is happening to it.

**Transformer:** This demon wants to use its host to gain a foothold on the Material Plane. To that end, it utilizes its considerable power to transform all or part of any creature it possesses into its own demonic shape. This process usually takes considerable time and effort on the part of the demon, but the overall effect is devastating.

A transformer demon can attempt only one change per day, and that change can never encompass more than one-quarter of the host’s body. Whenever it makes such an attempt, the host must succeed on a Fortitude saving throw (DC 10 + 1/2 fiend’s HD + fiend’s Con modifier) to resist the change. Failure indicates that some part of the host’s body transforms, either becoming identical to the corresponding portion of the possessing demon’s normal form or gaining some sort of fiendish physical characteristic (see the Fiendish Characteristics sidebar). Whether the initial save succeeds or fails, the host must immediately attempt a Will saving throw (DC 10 + 1/2 fiend’s HD + fiend’s Cha modifier). Success means that she can communicate this transformation (or attempted transformation) to others, and the demon cannot stop her from doing so in any way. Failure means the host attempts to conceal the transformation for as long as possible.

Complete transformation takes at least four days (one for each quarter of the host’s body). Once a victim has been completely transformed, the demon has essentially taken the host’s place. At that point, the demon has access to all the powers and abilities it normally possesses. The victim is trapped within the demon—effectively functioning as a “rider” in the demon’s body—and can neither communicate nor exercise any power.

Transformer demons seldom, if ever, leave their host bodies willingly. Killing a transformer demon slays the host but frees its soul for the purpose of a *[[Resurrection (Spell)|resurrection]]* or *[[Raise Dead (Spell)|raise dead]]* spell. A transformer demon cannot be banished once it has fully changed its host, but it can still be exorcised. If the fiend is forced out of the host’s body by any means, the victim must attempt a Fortitude saving throw (DC 10 + 1/2 fiend’s HD + fiend’s Cha modifier). Success frees the character of the demon and returns her body to normal; failure means the victim dies of shock but can be raised normally.

Some demon cults consider voluntary transformation a religious rite. In such cases, cultists possessed by transformer demons willingly fail saving throws to resist transformation. As is their nature, however, transformer demons often use full transformation as a “reward” for the cultists offering themselves for sacrifice.

**Using the Levels of Possession**

Possessed NPCs can present an entertaining challenge for the characters, but running possessed PCs makes life difficult for the Dungeon Master. However, this situation can be rewarding, as long as the DM allows the player a certain amount of control. The following tips might help.

**Allies and PCs:** Only a rare PC can form an alliance with her possessor and still retain a nonevil alignment. Still, an unwary or desperate PC might try to bargain with a possessing demon. If a deal is struck, the demon should continue to prompt the character to perform more and more evil acts until she either rebels or becomes completely evil (usually becoming an NPC).

**Controllers and PCs:** In general, this sort of possession should be limited to NPCs, since it takes the game out of a player’s hands. However, if the DM has reason to suppose that the characters can fight the demon off or the affected PC can resist control on a regular basis, this arrangement can make an intriguing storyline. If possible, allow the player to run the character even while he is possessed, but be careful—few players can truly act chaotic evil with respect to their own parties and still ensure that everyone enjoys the game. On the positive side, a PC/controller relationship can be used to end a demonic possession in a climactic way.

**Enemies and PCs:** The enemy fiend works well as a possessor of PCs. This creature makes life difficult for its victim but does not really prevent her from doing whatever  he desires. A player willing to roleplay this situation can add drama to the game for some time (although not indefinitely). Furthermore, an enemy possessor can become an ally (and vice versa) if necessary.

**Mutterers and PCs:** As DM, you might want to pass notes to the affected player or even apply secret modifiers (usually +2 or –2) to the character’s d20 rolls to refl ect the mutterer’s growing infl uence over the character. If you know that the player in question can handle the intricacies of playing a possessed character, you might want to let him in on the secret early and keep the truth from the rest of the players for a while.

**Riders and PCs:** If the PC has reason to suspect the demon’s presence, you might wish to give the player clues occasionally. Otherwise, its presence should remain a secret. Make sure the rider attempts to hide from the PCs whenever necessary.

Transformers and PCs: This situation is quite difficult to run, but it offers a great deal of drama. The affected PC usually gains some interesting—if horrific—benefits and might be forced to hide the affl iction from others. In addition, she might have to deal with the possibility of a horrible death in a short period of time. When a transformer possesses a PC, all the characters should undergo a rollercoaster ride of situations and emotions as they race against the possessing demon’s attempts to transform and permanently inhabit their friend.

**Source:**  Fiendish Codex I: Hordes of the Abyss (WotC), pg. 21-25

**PROFANE TEMPTATIONS**

The succubus's ability to grant a profane gift to those she encounters is one of her most subtle methods of influencing mortal actions. Yet the gift detailed in the Pathfinder RPG Bestiary is only one such effect-some succubi have variant profane gifts that grant additional boons to the target. 

**Gift of Transformation:** The succubus's profane gift also allows the target to use the succubus's change shape ability. While using this ability, the succubus can also use [[Detect Thoughts (Spell)|detect thoughts]] on the target, and the target's saving throws against this or the succubus's *[[Suggestion (Spell)|suggestion]]* ability take a -4 penalty.

**Gift of Domination:** The target can allow the succubus to use her *[[Dominate Person (Spell)|dominate person]]* spell-like ability through the link to affect creatures as if the target had been the source of the spell-like ability. Whenever the target allows the succubus to do so, he gains a +2 profane bonus to a second ability score of his choice (other than the one already profanely enhanced) for 24 hours.

**Gift of Recovery:** Once per day as an immediate action when the target fails a Will saving throw from a source other than the succubus who granted the profane gift, the character can allow the succubus to attempt a second Will saving throw (using her own Will save) to resist the effect. If the succubus fails the save the effect affects the character normally, but if she makes the save, the character is treated as if he made his initial Will save. The next time the succubus uses *[[Suggestion (Spell)|suggestion]]* on the PC, he automatically fails the saving throw. 

**Source:**  Demons Revisisted (Paizo), pg. 56


---
## Tags
#Rule-System/Pathfinder #Publisher/Paizo #Rule/Core #Sources/Occult-Adventures

