---
ImportedOn: "Thursday, February 16, 2023 6:10:23 PM"
Aliases:
  - "Tiny Igloo"
  - "leomund's tiny igloo"
Category: "Spells"
Suffix: "Spell"
Tags:
  - "Category/Spells"
parent:
  - "T"
up:
  - "T"
prev:
  - "Thunderclap (Spell)"
next:
  - "Thaw (Spell)"
RWtopicId: "Topic_18892"
---
# Tiny Igloo (Spell)
## Overview
[[Evocation Spells|Evocation]] \[[[Cold Spells|cold]]]

**Level:** [[2nd Level Sorcerer Spells|Sorcerer 2]], [[2nd Level Wizard Spells|Wizard 2]]

**BoXM:** [[BoXM 3rd-Level Wizard Spells List|Wizard 3]]

**Casting Time:** 1 standard action

**Components:** V, S, M (a small dollop of seal fat or caribou fat)

**Range:** 5 ft.

**Effect:** 5-ft.-radius sphere, with 1-in.-thick wall/level centered on your location

**Duration:** 2 hours/level (D)

**Saving Throw:** None

**Spell Resistance:** No

**Source:** Frostburn (WotC), pg. 101

You create a small domed snow house with a single entrance passage. Up to one Large or three Medium or twelve Small creatures can fit into the igloo with you; they can freely pass into and out of the hut without harming it.

The temperature inside the igloo is magically warm, at exactly 50° F, and the walls do not melt. The igloo has two features that help arctic survival: a sleeping platform and a lamp. The snow sleeping platform takes advantage of the warm air trapped below the low roof, generated by body heat and a stone lamp. The magical smokeless lamp provides heat for comfort and for cooking.

The igloo also provides protection against the elements, such as wind, snow, and hail. The igloo withstands any wind of less than hurricane force, but a hurricane (75+ mph wind speed) or greater force destroys it.

The loose-packed snow of the igloo has a hardness of 0, and 3 hp per inch of thickness.

**GM Note**

*House Rule:* This spell is known as *Leomund's tiny igloo* in the World of Greyhawk campaign setting.


---
## Tags
#Rule/OGL #Sources/Frostburn #Rule-System/Pathfinder #Rule/Spell #Rule/3PP #Publisher/WotC #Spell-Rarity/Rare #Spell-Resistance/No #Rule/House-Rule #Spell-Descriptor/Cold #Spell-School/Evocation #Saving-Throws/None #Spell-Range/Other #Spell-Level/Sorcerer-Wizard-2

