---
ImportedOn: "Thursday, February 16, 2023 6:10:23 PM"
Aliases:
  - "Places of Power: Sanctums"
Category: "eMRD"
Tags:
  - "Category/eMRD"
parent:
  - "C08 Advanced Topics"
up:
  - "C08 Advanced Topics"
next:
  - "Haunts"
RWtopicId: "Topic_942"
---
# Places of Power: Sanctums
## Overview
Everyone knows that if you have to fight a wizard, you absolutely never want to do it in the seat of his power. A wizard (or other spellcaster)’s sanctum is the place where he is most powerful. As master of his domain, he can call upon additional power, and most likely has invested in one or more nasty toys that are a part of the place itself, as well. This popular and flavorful fantasy theme has some presence in *Pathfinder* through a few spells like *[[Mage's Private Sanctum (Spell)|mage’s private sanctum]]*, but overall, there is very little to make the average sorcerer’s ritual room any different from any other large room with some sigils carved on the floor.

The optional rules included in this section are designed to provide GMs and players alike with rules for creating private (or, sometimes, communal) sanctums for spellcasters. Whether this serves as the “party base,” or as a bit of additional oomph to give to the big bad evil warlock at the end of the adventure, a well-made sanctum will make any game more memorable.

## Creating a Sanctum
**Creating a Sanctum**

A sanctum is created through a combination of both physical and magical means: the physical objects that make up the sanctum—the altars, alchemy labs, braziers, skulls, candles, and the like—must all be made or purchased and then put into place, and, additionally, the character who intends to become the sanctum’s master must perform an elaborate ritual which forges a mystic connection between himself and the area that is to serve as his place of power.

A sanctum consists of several components, each of which requires an initial cost in sanctum points in order to add it to the sanctum. A sanctum point is an abstract representation of the strength of the bond between the sanctum and its master. In essence, the more sanctum points a given component costs, the more useful and powerful that component will be. In game terms, for every sanctum point to be included in the sanctum at the time of its creation, the sanctum’s master must expend 1,000 gp. This gold represents numerous different things, including the cost of any physical components of the sanctum (obsidian altars and golden idols aren’t cheap!) as well as special incense, ointment, and other magical components required to perform the ritual.

The ritual to create a sanctum takes 2 hours per sanctum point to be invested in the sanctum. During this time, the character creating the sanctum cannot perform any strenuous activity, and he cannot stop except to sleep for eight hours per day, or the ritual is ruined and must be started over from the beginning (the character does not need to expend the 1,000 gp per sanctum point again, however). Once the ritual is complete, the sanctum becomes fully operational immediately, and the character officially becomes the master of the sanctum, with all of the benefits that that entails, as determined by the components that were chosen and the number of sanctum points that were invested. Once created, a sanctum lasts indefinitely.

A character cannot create a sanctum with more sanctum points invested in it than twice his caster level + his primary spellcasting ability score modifier, and no single component in a character’s sanctum can have more sanctum points invested in it than his caster level. Characters that cannot cast spells cannot create sanctums. A character can have as many different sanctums as he likes, and each of them can have the maximum number of sanctum points invested in them, if desired, but a character cannot have two sanctums within 1 mile of each other.

Using either the *[[Create Sanctum (Spell)|create sanctum]]* or *[[Create Sanctum Sanctorum (Spell)|create sanctum sanctorum]]* spell or 9 for *[[Create Sanctum Sanctorum (Spell)|create sanctum sanctorum]]**.* These spells (and their effects) do not stack; rather if *[[Create Sanctum (Spell)|create sanctum]]* *[[Create Sanctum Sanctorum (Spell)|create sanctum sanctorum]]* may be use to improve the sanctum and it, in effect, overwrites the initial spell. When either of these spells is used in the construction or improvement of a sanctum, the duration of the spell(s) becomes permanent.

Using these spells in the improvement of a sanctum that did not utilize them in its initial construction increases the number of sanctum components possible by either 3 (for *[[Create Sanctum (Spell)|create sanctum]]*) or 5 (for *[[Create Sanctum Sanctorum (Spell)|create sanctum sanctorum]]*). These components may only be used to add accent, boundary, or workstation components.

Recasting either of these spell after they have been used in the construction (and/or improvement) of a sanctum has one effect worth noting, it 'updates' the number of sanctum points granted by the caster's level and his primary spellcasting ability score modifier.

## Improving a Sanctum
**Improving a Sanctum**

A sanctum can be improved in a fashion very similar to its creation. At any time, the master of a sanctum can invest additional sanctum points into an existing component of the sanctum, or can create a new component entirely. Doing so requires the expenditure of 1,000 gp per sanctum point to be added, and the master of the sanctum must perform a ritual that lasts 2 hours per sanctum point to be added.

Alternatively, the master of the sanctum can exchange an existing component for another, or move sanctum points that were invested in one component to another component. Doing so is costly and time consuming, but less so than simply adding a new component from scratch. The master of the sanctum must expend 500 gp per sanctum point that is being repurposed in this way, and must perform a ritual which lasts 2 hours per sanctum point that is being repurposed.

Only the master of the sanctum can improve a sanctum in either of these ways.

## Sanctums with Multiple Masters
**Sanctums with Multiple Masters**

If desired, multiple characters can pool their resources to create a single, shared sanctum. The process for doing this is identical to the process for creating a sanctum normally. The main advantage of having a shared sanctum is the ability to invest more sanctum points in it. The total number of sanctum points that can be invested in a shared sanctum in this way is equal to the combined caster level of each of the contributing members, plus the primary spellcasting ability score modifier of each contributing member. The cost per sanctum point remains the same, as does the amount of time that it takes to perform the ritual, but each character that is involved in the creation of the sanctum must participate in the entire ritual.

Once the sanctum is complete, each of the characters that contributed is treated as being the master of the sanctum for the purposes of the abilities and effects of any of the sanctum’s components (any effect that refers to “other characters” in the sanctum does not refer to any of the sanctum’s masters). If a component provides an ability that can only be used a certain number of times per day, those daily uses are shared amongst all of the masters of the sanctum (meaning that if there is only one daily use, only one of the sanctum’s masters can use that ability on any given day).

A character can also gain shared control over an existing sanctum, providing that the current master of the existing sanctum is willing. In order to do this, the new, secondary master of the sanctum must contribute at least one sanctum point to the sanctum (though typically the sanctum’s current master would expect a contribution equal to his or her own), expending the standard 1,000 gp per sanctum point to do so. Both the sanctum’s current master and the new, secondary master must participate in a ritual that lasts 2 hours per sanctum point to be added, at the end of which both characters are treated as masters of the sanctum.

## Inheriting a Sanctum
**Inheriting a Sanctum**

It is possible to inherit a sanctum, either with the wishes and blessing of the sanctum’s previous master, or without. When a sanctum’s master dies, the sanctum’s magic becomes dormant, but it is not completely gone. A character that visits the sanctum and recognizes its true nature can forge his own bond with it in order to reactivate its magic and become the sanctum’s new master. Doing so requires the same ritual and gold expenditure as creating a new sanctum, based on the number of sanctum points invested in the sanctum, but the character can become the sanctum’s master even if the sanctum has more sanctum points invested in it than twice his caster level + his primary spellcasting ability score modifier. He cannot, however, invest additional sanctum points in the sanctum or repurpose existing sanctum points unless his caster level and primary spellcasting ability score modifier are high enough to allow him to do so normally.

Alternatively, if the sanctum’s master is still alive, he can choose to pass on his mastery of the sanctum to another. Doing so requires the expenditure of 500 gp per sanctum point invested in the sanctum (this can be paid by either the sanctum’s old master or its new master), and the sanctum’s old master must perform a ritual lasting 2 hours per sanctum point invested in the sanctum. The sanctum’s new master can participate in the ritual as well, and if he does, this reduces the necessary time to 1 hour per sanctum point, but the sanctum’s new master does not need to be involved in the ritual, or even aware that it is occurring, in order for the transfer to take place. The transfer can occur regardless of distance.

## Using a Sanctum
**Using a Sanctum**

The exact benefits that a sanctum provides depend on what components it is comprised of, but in general, most components tend to function in similar fashions. Generally speaking, a component will either provide a constant bonus to the sanctum’s master (and sometimes other characters in the sanctum) as long as he is within the sanctum, or it will provide him with a specific ability that can be used by the sanctum’s master when he is within the sanctum, typically a limited number of times per day.

In the case of components that grant constant benefits, the sanctum’s master need only be within the sanctum in order to gain the benefit. Many components provide secondary, lesser benefits to other characters within the sanctum, as well. The sanctum’s master can deny these benefits to any given character within the sanctum at any time as a full-round action, and can return the benefits in the same way. A character who leaves the sanctum and enters it again regains any benefits, but the sanctum’s master can take them away again, as normal.

In the case of components that grant special abilities, those special abilities are always supernatural abilities that require a standard action to activate, unless the individual component’s description indicates to the contrary. The special ability can only be used while the sanctum’s master is within the sanctum. If desired, the sanctum’s master can bestow one of these abilities on another creature within the sanctum as a full-round action. Doing so allows that character to use the special ability as though he were the sanctum’s master. If the ability can only be used a limited number of times per day, than any uses that that character uses count against the number of uses that the sanctum’s true master can use that day. The sanctum master can revoke this benefit as a full-round action at any time, as long as the beneficiary has not already used the ability. A character that leaves the sanctum loses the ability to access any special abilities that have been granted to it in this way, although the sanctum’s master can bestow them anew, should the creature return.

Finally, several components impose penalties on creatures that enter the sanctum. These effects never apply to the sanctum’s master, and the sanctum’s master can grant any creature immunity to the effect as a full-round action. This protection lasts until revoked (another full-round action) or until the next time the creature leaves the sanctum.

Note that the various components of a sanctum can always be used for their normal purposes, as objects not associated with the sanctum. For example, while a sacrificial altar that is used as a component for a sanctum may only grant its special ability to the sanctum’s master, this does not prevent other characters from using it to perform sacrifices (or as a table to play cards on, for that matter).

## Components of a Sanctum
**Components of a Sanctum**

A sanctum is composed of a number of components, which provide its master (and sometimes other characters) with unique abilities and static bonuses as long as he remains within the sanctum. A sanctum is generally limited in the types and number of components that it contains, and has a number of slots corresponding to each type of component, which determine the maximum number of components that it can incorporate. By default, a sanctum can incorporate up to 7 components (3 accents, 1 boundary, 1 core, 1 threshold, and 1 workstation) though many contain fewer components, and a rare few allow for additional accents or workstations (at the GM’s discretion). All places of power must include at least a core and a boundary, even if they contain nothing else. Finally, a place of power cannot contain any components whose cost in sanctum points is greater than the core’s cost in sanctum points.

### Component Slots
**Component Slots**

**Accents:** Accents are important to a sanctum, and though they play a less significant role in the sanctum’s overall function, they provide it with its sense of identity and form. Accents are often the most distinguishing features of a sanctum (apart from the core) and come in a vast and wide array. Typical examples of accents include candles, icons, braziers, skulls, mushroom rings, and many more.

Accents generally provide static bonuses to all characters within the sanctum and give a real sense of the place’s magic. Unlike the other component slots, a place of power can have up to 3 accents.

**Boundary:** A boundary is critical to a sanctum, and determines the space in which the magic of a sanctum can exist. These boundaries can be either physical or ephemeral, but are generally apparent to those who are familiar with the sanctum. Typical examples of a boundary include magical circles, standing stones, walls, rings of fire, and magical fields.

A sanctum cannot exist without a boundary, and a sanctum that loses its boundary immediately gains the emanation (10 foot) boundary, so long as the core remains intact. The entire sanctum must be contained within the boundary, and any components of the sanctum that are outside the boundary do not function. Characters can only benefit from the sanctum’s components while within the sanctum’s boundary.

**Core:** The core is the heart of a sanctum, the source of its energy and the object which defines its identity. A core is always the focal point of a sanctum, and is generally immediately obvious, due to the reverence placed around it. Typical examples of a core include altars, idols, monoliths, sarcophagi, and thrones.

The practical effects of a core vary from one core to another, as described below; however, all have a few traits in common. The first important trait of the core component is its necessity to the sanctum. A sanctum cannot exist without the core, and a sanctum with no core loses all of its other abilities and properties. A sanctum’s core also determines the maximum strength of the other components that make up the sanctum, and no individual component within a sanctum can have more sanctum points invested in it than the number of sanctum points invested in the sanctum’s core. Core components almost always provide benefits in the form a single special ability that can be performed by the sanctum’s master.

**Threshold:** A threshold protects the sanctum from unwanted entry and ensures that only those desired by the creator or inheritor of a sanctum be allowed entry. A threshold in conjunction with a boundary restricts access to the magic of a sanctum and prevents its power from being turned against its caretakers by their enemies. Typical examples of thresholds include doors, ritual pools, arches, stone paths, and magic wards.

In essence, a character who fails to pass the threshold or who fails to perform the ritual described in the threshold’s individual entry is considered to be outside the boundary of the sanctum, even if he enters it physically. He can gain no benefit from the place of power, although he can still be affected by any negative effects that apply to intruders within the sanctum. Often, powerful thresholds physically bar affected creatures from entering the sanctum.

**Workstation:** The workstation is a component designed for a single task that is commonly performed by the sanctum’s master. Often separate from the regular uses of the sanctum, workstations serve a different but related purpose from the rest of the sanctum’s components. Typical examples of workstations include a wizard’s alchemy lab, a sacrificial altar, a baptismal pool, a summoning circle, and an embalming station.

The practical abilities of a workstation are wholly defined by the individual component’s description, though generally only the sanctum’s master gains any special benefit from them.

### Component Types
**Component Types**

**Altar (core, 1 or more points):** Though often a simple stone or wooden table designed for worship and the sacrifice of materials or small animals, the more sanctum points invested in the creation of this component, the more exotic and ornate the altar becomes. Once per day, the master of the sanctum can perform a simple ritual as a full-round action. If he does, then he can harness the power of the altar to either heal his allies within the sanctum, or harm his enemies within the sanctum. If he chooses to heal his allies, then each of his allies within the sanctum (including himself) heals a number of hit points equal to 2d6 per sanctum point invested in the altar. If he chooses to harm his enemies, then each creature in the sanctum that is not one of his allies suffers 2d6 points of damage per sanctum point invested in the altar. In the case of damaging his enemies, a successful Fortitude save (DC 10 + the number of sanctum points invested in the altar) halves this damage.

**Ancient Writings (accent, 1 or more points):** Ancient texts litter the sanctum, either scribbled upon the walls or printed on pages bound in ruined tomes. Reading the ancient writings takes time, and doing so has no effect unless they are studied for at least 1 hour. If the master of the sanctum studies the texts for at least 1 hour, he can make a single [[Knowledge (Skill)|Knowledge]] skill check with a bonus equal to the number of sanctum points invested in the ancient writings. Further, he is treated as being trained in the appropriate [[Knowledge (Skill)|Knowledge]] skill, even if he has no ranks in it, for the purposes of this check. Other characters can also study the ancient writings for 1 hour and make a special [[Knowledge (Skill)|Knowledge]] check in this way, but the bonus that they gain on the [[Knowledge (Skill)|Knowledge]] check is only equal to 1/2 the number of sanctum points invested in the ancient writings (rounded down, minimum +0).

**Arcane Forge (workstation, 7 points):** Containing everything one needs to forge weapons and armor of the most fantastic sort, an arcane forge also concentrates the magical energies of a place of power in order to aid in the crafting of magical items. An arcane forge always provides sufficient tools for metal working, fletching, and leatherwork, and often contains tools and supplies for a variety of other trades as well. In addition to providing a handy workstation for crafters of all sorts, the arcane forge makes it easier for the master of the sanctum to craft magical items, and reduces the cost of creating all magic items that he creates using the arcane forge by 200 gp per sanctum point that the master of the sanctum has invested in the entire sanctum, to a maximum discount of 1/2 the item’s cost.

**Arcane Powder (boundary, 5 points per 10-ft. radius):** Dust of some precious stone or metal arranged in a perfect circle with the core at its center, this boundary is kept unbroken and in place by the magic of the sanctum. No magic can cross this boundary, and spells cast from one side of the boundary cannot target creatures on the other side. If a spell has an area, and that area overlaps the boundary’s border, then the area of the spell stops at the boundary, and cannot cross it.

**Arcane Well (core, 4 or more points):** This component is made up of a flow of energy resulting from a ley line or other magical concentration, which provides an exceptional excess of magical energy locally. The sanctum’s master can utilize the arcane well to enhance his own magic. Once per day, while casting a spell within the sanctum, the sanctum’s master can gain a bonus to the caster level and saving throw DC of that spell equal to 1/4 the number of sanctum points invested in the arcane well.

**Bane (threshold, 5 points):** Attuned to a specific sort of creature, a bane threshold damages any creatures of the chosen type who would dare enter the place of power. When this threshold is created, choose a creature type from the ranger favored enemy class feature (such as aberration or humanoid \[dwarf]). Any creature of the chosen type which passes through the boundary suffers an amount of damage equal to 1d6 per 5 sanctum points that have been invested in the entire sanctum, and is treated as though he were outside the boundary of the sanctum for the purposes of any benefits granted by the sanctum’s components.

**Baptismal Waters (workstation, 10 points):** A standing pool or running stream of blessed water. This 10-foot by 10-foot section of water is imbued with divine power, and has all the same effects as holy water. Additionally, the master of the sanctum can bathe a living creature in the enchanted waters in order to affect that creature as though with the redemption, reverse magical alignment change, or temptation versions of the *[[Atonement (Spell)|atonement]]* spell. The caster level for this effect is equal to the number of sanctum points invested in the entire sanctum (to a maximum of 20), and the saving throw DC to resist the effect is equal to 10 + 1/2 the number of sanctum points invested in the entire sanctum (to a maximum DC of 25). Any given creature can only ever be affected by this effect once from any given baptismal waters.

**Black Candles (accent, 3 or more points):** Made from black wax, these simple candles are tools attuned to arcane magic. For the purposes of all arcane spells that the master of the sanctum casts within the sanctum, he treats his caster level as being 1 higher than it actually is for every 3 sanctum points invested in the black candles. Other characters that cast arcane spells within the sanctum treat their caster level as 1 higher than it actually is for every 6 sanctum points invested in the black candles for the purposes of such spells.

**Bone Barrier (boundary, 8 points per 20-ft. radius):** The bones of sentient humanoids are used to construct this boundary, and are either buried underground or erected in a grim wall around the sanctum. Whenever a creature other than the master of the sanctum enters the sanctum, and each minute thereafter, he must succeed on a Will save (DC 10 + 1/2 the number of sanctum points invested in the entire sanctum) or be [[Shaken|shaken]] for 1 minute. If the creature fails its saving throw by 10 or more, it is [[Frightened|frightened]], instead. This is a mind-affecting fear effect.

**Braziers (accent, 4 points):** Large iron bowls of flame fill a 5-foot square within the sanctum, and shed bright light to a radius of 60 feet, and dim light for an additional 120 feet beyond that. The master of the sanctum gains fire resistance 5 as long as he remains within the sanctum. Other characters in the sanctum gain fire resistance 2. If there are multiple braziers in the sanctum, their fire resistance stacks.

**Charm of Calling (accent, 1 point):** Various charms and baubles representing the calling of creatures adorn the sanctum, the exact form of which depends on the cultural background and aesthetic tastes of the sanctum’s master. The sanctum’s master treats his caster level as being 1 higher than it actually is for the purpose of any spells with the calling subschool that he casts within the sanctum. A sanctum cannot have more than one charm of calling.

**Charm of Charm (accent, 1 point):** Various charms and baubles representing the seduction and manipulation of creatures adorn the sanctum, the exact form of which depends on the cultural background and aesthetic tastes of the sanctum’s master. The sanctum’s master treats his caster level as being 1 higher than it actually is for the purpose of any spells with the charm subschool that he casts within the sanctum. A sanctum cannot have more than one charm of charm.

**Charm of Compulsion (accent, 1 point):** Various charms and baubles representing the enslavement and dominance of others adorn the sanctum, the exact form of which depends on the cultural background and aesthetic tastes of the sanctum’s master. The sanctum’s master treats his caster level as being 1 higher than it actually is for the purpose of any spells with the compulsion subschool that he casts within the sanctum. A sanctum cannot have more than one charm of compulsion.

**Charm of Figments (accent, 1 point):** Various charms and baubles representing the ephemeral and false adorn the sanctum, the exact form of which depends on the cultural background and aesthetic tastes of the sanctum’s master. The sanctum’s master treats his caster level as being 1 higher than it actually is for the purpose of any spells with the figment subschool that he casts within the sanctum. A sanctum cannot have more than one charm of figments.

**Charm of Glamers (accent, 1 point):** Various charms and baubles representing disguise and deception adorn the sanctum, the exact form of which depends on the cultural background and aesthetic tastes of the sanctum’s master. The sanctum’s master treats his caster level as being 1 higher than it actually is for the purpose of any spells with the glamer subschool that he casts within the sanctum. A sanctum cannot have more than one charm of glamers.

**Charm of Healing (accent, 1 point):** Various charms and baubles representing the healing of creatures adorn the sanctum, the exact form of which depends on the cultural background and aesthetic tastes of the sanctum’s master. The sanctum’s master treats his caster level as being 1 higher than it actually is for the purpose of any spells with the healing subschool that he casts within the sanctum. A sanctum cannot have more than one charm of healing.

**Charm of Patterns (accent, 1 point):** Various charms and baubles of wild colors and eye-wrenching shapes adorn the sanctum, the exact form of which depends on the cultural background and aesthetic tastes of the sanctum’s master. The sanctum’s master treats his caster level as being 1 higher than it actually is for the purpose of any spells with the pattern subschool that he casts within the sanctum. A sanctum cannot have more than one charm of patterns.

**Charm of Phantasms (accent, 1 point):** Various charms and baubles of frightening and unknown shapes adorn the sanctum, the exact form of which depends on the cultural background and aesthetic tastes of the sanctum’s master. The sanctum’s master treats his caster level as being 1 higher than it actually is for the purpose of any spells with the phantasm subschool that he casts within the sanctum. A sanctum cannot have more than one charm of phantasms.

**Charm of Polymorph (accent, 1 point):** Various charms and baubles which constantly shift in shape and size adorn the sanctum, the exact form of which depends on the cultural background and aesthetic tastes of the sanctum’s master. The sanctum’s master treats his caster level as being 1 higher than it actually is for the purpose of any spells with the polymorph subschool that he casts within the sanctum. A sanctum cannot have more than one charm of polymorph.

**Charm of Scrying (accent, 1 point):** Various charms and baubles representing voyeurism and magical spycraft adorn the sanctum, the exact form of which depends on the cultural background and aesthetic tastes of the sanctum’s master. The sanctum’s master treats his caster level as being 1 higher than it actually is for the purpose of any spells with the scrying subschool that he casts within the sanctum. A sanctum cannot have more than one charm of scrying.

**Charm of Shadows (accent, 1 point):** Various charms and baubles representing shadows and darkness adorn the sanctum, the exact form of which depends on the cultural background and aesthetic tastes of the sanctum’s master. The sanctum’s master treats his caster level as being 1 higher than it actually is for the purpose of any spells with the shadow subschool that he casts within the sanctum. A sanctum cannot have more than one charm of shadows.

**Charm of Summoning (accent, 1 point):** Various charms and baubles representing the summoning of creatures adorn the sanctum, the exact form of which depends on the cultural background and aesthetic tastes of the sanctum’s master. The sanctum’s master treats his caster level as being 1 higher than it actually is for the purpose of any spells with the summoning subschool that he casts within the sanctum. A sanctum cannot have more than one charm of summoning.

**Charm of Teleportation (accent, 1 point):** Various charms and baubles representing the magical transportation of creatures adorn the sanctum, the exact form of which depends on the cultural background and aesthetic tastes of the sanctum’s master. The sanctum’s master treats his caster level as being 1 higher than it actually is for the purpose of any spells with the teleporation subschool that he casts within the sanctum. A sanctum cannot have more than one charm of teleportation.

**Chill Air (accent, 4 points):** The air is filled with a cool chill within the sanctum. Whenever the master of the sanctum casts a spell with the cold descriptor within the sanctum, if that spell deals damage, it deals an additional point of cold damage per damage die. Additionally, whenever another character enters the sanctum, and every minute thereafter, he must succeed on a Fortitude save (DC 10 + 1/2 the number of sanctum points invested in the entire sanctum) or be [[Fatigued|fatigued]] for 1 minute. A sanctum cannot have both chill air and stifling heat at the same time.

**Crystal (accent, 2 points):** This humming crystal can be of any shape, though it is always at least 1 foot tall or long, and prominently displayed. A crystal component grants the master of the sanctum a +4 bonus on all [[Spellcraft (Skill)|Spellcraft]] checks made within the sanctum. Other characters gain a +1 bonus on all [[Spellcraft (Skill)|Spellcraft]] checks made within the sanctum.

**Emanation (10 ft.) (boundary, 0 points):** The area nearby to the core of the place of power is magically attuned to it and creates a small place of power. The area within a 10- foot radius of the core of a place of power is considered to be within the boundary of a place of power. Any place of power that does not already have a boundary is treated as having the emanation (10 ft.) component as its boundary.

**Fountain (core, 5 or more points):** This glittering fountain of magical water can have restorative effects. Once per day, the master of the sanctum can drink from the fountain in order to receive its restorative effects. A fountain invested with 5 - 9 sanctum points functions as a *[[Restoration, Lesser (Spell)|lesser restoration]]* spell, while a fountain invested with 10 - 14 sanctum points functions as a *[[Restoration (Spell)|restoration]]* spell, a fountain invested with 15 - 19 sanctum points functions as a *[[Restoration, Greater (Spell)|greater restoration]]* spell, and a fountain invested with 20 or more sanctum points functions as a *[[Restoration, Greater (Spell)|greater restoration]]* spell, and also restores a character’s youth, ending all magical and supernatural aging effects, and setting the drinker’s age to the minimum age for adulthood for a character of his race.

**Glacier (accent, 4 points):** A large patch of ice fills a 10-ft. by 10-ft. area of the place of power, and its slippery surface is difficult to walk on (treat as difficult terrain). The master of the sanctum gains cold resistance 5 as long as he remains within the sanctum. Other characters in the sanctum gain cold resistance 2. If there are multiple glaciers in the sanctum, their cold resistance stacks.

**Grave Dirt (accent, 2 - 5 points):** The sanctum’s floor is covered (or at least sprinkled) with the dirt from freshly-dug graves. Undead creatures within the sanctum gain fast healing equal to the number of sanctum points invested in the grave dirt for as long as they remain within the sanctum.

**Great Tree (core, 1 or more points):** A large tree grows in the center of the place of power, filling the area with a potent natural magic. Once per day, the master of the sanctum can fill the area within the physical boundary of the place of power with grasping vines, forcing all other characters in the sanctum to succeed on a Reflex save (DC 10 + the number of sanctum points invested in the great tree) or become entangled. The vines last for a number of rounds equal to the number of sanctum points invested in the great tree, and any creatures that escape or avoid entanglement must make a new saving throw to avoid becoming entangled each round as long as the vines remain.

**Grimoire (core, 1 or more points):** Whether contained in a massive tome, scrawled in runes, or hidden in blackened scrolls, this is the most common type of sanctum core for serious, and often power-hungry, students of knowledge. Whatever form a grimoire takes, it must be securely fashioned in a single permanent location in order to function.

The grimoire functions as a wizard’s spellbook with infinite pages, except that it can also be used by any character capable of preparing spells from a similar source (such as alchemists and witches), and there is no cost in ink or other components in order to record a spell within it. Additionally, as long as he is adjacent to the grimoire, the master of the sanctum can cast any spell that is recorded in the grimoire as though he had prepared it. Doing so does not expend any prepared spells or unused spell slots, but the master of the sanctum cannot cast more total spell levels in this way per day than 1/2 the number of sanctum points invested in the grimoire (rounded down, minimum 0). If the spell’s casting time is less than 1 round, it is increased to 1 round when cast this way. The master of the sanctum must still provide all material components and focuses necessary for the spell. The master of the sanctum cannot use this ability to cast a spell that is a higher spell-level than he could normally cast.

**Guardian (threshold, 1 or more points):** A guardian creature stands ready to protect the sanctum from any threat. This creature must be a mindless construct or undead creature whose CR is less than or equal to the number of sanctum points spent on this component. The creature cannot leave the place of power, and can perform no actions other than to fight any intruders within the sanctum. The master of the sanctum can choose whether the guardian automatically attacks any other creatures that enter the sanctum (in which case he can designate a single creature as “welcome” as a move action, causing the guardian to ignore that creature until the creature leaves the sanctum, or until the master of the sanctum withdraws this protection with another move action), or whether it remains inert unless specifically directed to attack a creature within the sanctum by the master of the sanctum.

If the guardian is slain, this component is lost, as is the gold spent to create it.

**Idol (core, 3 or more points):** This component is an image of a deity, demon, or otherworldly force designed to be worshiped and glorified. All idols used for the core component of a sanctum are representative of a particular ideal or aspect of the force they depict, and are consequently associated with a single cleric domain. Once per day, as a full-round action, the master of the sanctum can cast a single spell that appears on the domain list associated with the domain the idol represents as a spell-like ability. The chosen spell must be of a spell level equal to or less than 1/3 the number of sanctum points invested in the idol. If the chosen spell has costly material components, the master of the sanctum must provide them. The caster level for this ability is equal to the number of sanctum points invested in the idol (maximum 20th).

**Key (threshold, 3 or 9 points):** This is not a physical key, though many sanctums are protected by locked doors. Instead, anyone that enters the threshold without holding a specific type of item (as defined by the master of the sanctum when the sanctum points are invested in this component) is not treated as being within the sanctum for the purposes of any benefits granted to characters within the sanctum. If the component is invested with 9 sanctum points, then creatures not in possession of an item of the chosen type are physically incapable of entering the sanctum unless they succeed on a Will save (DC 10 + 1/2 the number of sanctum points invested in the entire sanctum). A creature that fails this saving throw cannot try again for 24 hours. The type of item associated with this protection can be anything that the master of the sanctum desires, as long as items of the chosen type can readily be purchased in most communities for less than 1,000 gp.

**Library (workstation, 10 points):** A library contains books on a myriad of subjects which provide a substantial advantage to researchers. Any character that studies in the library for at least 1 hour gains a +3 bonus on all Knowledge checks made in the next 24 hours. Additionally, the master of the sanctum can spend 4 or more hours poring over the musty tomes in order to research a specific topic. If he does, he learns information about that topic as though he had cast a *legend lore* spell. This ability can be used to research non-legendary subjects, but can only grant information about those subjects that could be gained with a successful DC 35 Knowledge check in the appropriate Knowledge skill.

**Magic Stone (accent 1 point):** This stone is attuned to magic and attracts arcane power, making all spells cast within the sanctum easier to resist, as the stone absorbs some of their power. Characters within the sanctum gain a +1 bonus on saving throws made to resist spells. The master of the sanctum gains a +2 bonus on saving throws made to resist spells, instead.

**Monument (accent, 4 or 10 points):** The sanctum contains a large monument of ritual or artistic significance, displaying the majesty of the place of power. If the monument has been invested with 4 sanctum points, it occupies a 10-ft. cube, and grants the master of the sanctum a +4 circumstance bonus on all Charisma checks and Charisma-based skill checks made within the sanctum. Further, anyone else in the sanctum is left in awe of the grand—and often alien—structure of the monument, and is distracted by it, suffering a -2 penalty on all Perception, Sense Motive, and Initiative checks made within the sanctum. Alternatively, if the monument has been invested with 10 sanctum points, it occupies a 30-ft. cube, and grants the master of the sanctum a +10 bonus on all Charisma checks and Charisma-based skill checks made within the sanctum, while other characters in the sanctum suffer a -4 penalty on all Perception, Sense Motive, and Initiative checks made within the sanctum.

**Mushroom Ring (accent, 3 points):** A circle of brightly colored toadstools fills a 10-foot-radius area within the sanctum. As long as he is within the sanctum, the master of the sanctum is immune to diseases of all kind, as well as the sickened and nauseated conditions. Other characters in the sanctum gain a +4 bonus on saving throws made to resist diseases while within the sanctum.

**Portal to Beyond, Lesser (core, 12 or more points):** The shape of these portals varies somewhat, though all bear a grand and regal countenance that makes their significance obvious to all who look upon them. Most commonly represented by a large door or archway located in the center of a sanctum, a lesser portal to beyond is linked with one or more other planes of existence, and can be used to transport between them. A lesser portal to beyond is connected to a single plane of the creator’s choice, chosen when the sanctum points are invested in it. For each additional sanctum point beyond 12, the portal can connect to an additional plane. Once per day, the master of the sanctum can speak a command word and enter the lesser portal to beyond in order to be transported to any of the planes the portal is connected to. This functions as the spell *plane shift*, except that the character using the portal to beyond can choose his destination on the connected plane, accurate to within 100 feet.

**Portal to Beyond, Greater (core, 35 or more points):** These portals appear similar to lesser portals to beyond, but are much more potent. A greater portal to beyond functions as a constant and permanent *gate* spell to a single location on a single plane of existence. For each additional sanctum point invested in the greater portal to beyond in excess of 35, the greater portal to beyond can connect to an additional location on the same plane or a different one. The master of the sanctum can change which *gate* spell is active at any given time as a standard action, or can shut down the *gate* entirely, but only from within the sanctum. The other end of any *gates* connected to the greater portal to beyond appear as shimmering, opaque doorways in space, and are invisible (and non-functional) when the greater portal to beyond is attuned to a different *gate*, or is turned off.

Additionally, once per day, the master of the sanctum can call a creature through the greater portal to beyond by sacrificing 10,000 gp worth of rare offerings. This functions identically to the calling creatures version of the *gate* spell.

**Riddle (threshold, 1 or 5 points):** This threshold requires that anyone wishing to enter the sanctum must answer a specific riddle (as defined by the master of the sanctum when the sanctum points are invested in this component) or else be treated as not being within the sanctum for the purposes of any benefits granted to characters within the sanctum. If the riddle is invested with 5 or more sanctum points, then creatures that do not satisfactorily answer the riddle are physically incapable of entering the sanctum unless they succeed on a Will save (DC 10 + 1/2 the number of sanctum points invested in the entire sanctum). A creature that fails this saving throw cannot try again for 24 hours. The riddle, as well as any other information necessary to solve it, must be presented at the entrance to the sanctum, and the answer to the riddle must actually make sense as the answer of the riddle. If these requirements are not met, this component has no effect until the requirements are met again.

**Rift in Time (core, 10 or more points):** These rifts typically appear to be tears in reality, with wild warping in the air and vibrant colors being common manifestations. Once per day, as a swift action, while the master of the sanctum is within the sanctum, he can call upon the rift to affect time within the sanctum. This functions as the spell *time stop*, except that she cannot leave the sanctum during this time, and it only lasts for a number of rounds equal to 1 + 1 per 5 sanctum points invested in the rift in time beyond 10 (to a maximum of 5 rounds at 30 points).

**Ring of Fire (boundary, 5 or more points):** A ring of blazing, supernatural fire surrounds the sanctum. Any character that enters the sanctum other than the master of the sanctum suffers an amount of fire damage equal to 1d6 per 2 sanctum points invested in the entire sanctum (to a maximum of 20d6). By default, a ring of fire component has a 30-ft. radius. For each additional sanctum point invested in the ring of fire, its radius can be increased by 5 feet.

**Ritual (threshold, 4 or 12 points):** A simple ritual protects the sanctum. Anyone that enters the threshold without performing a specific, brief ritual (as defined by the master of the sanctum when the sanctum points are invested in this component) is not treated as being within the sanctum for the purposes of any benefits granted to characters within the sanctum. If the component is invested with 12 sanctum points, then creatures that do not perform the ritual are physically incapable of entering the sanctum unless they succeed on a Will save (DC 10 + 1/2 the number of sanctum points invested in the entire sanctum). A creature that fails this saving throw cannot try again for 24 hours. The ritual in question must be very simple and relatively intuitive. Typical examples include anointing oneself with oil or reciting a short piece of scripture.

**Sarcophagus (core, 1 or more points):** These decorative coffins are favored by necromancers and may or may not contain the remains of a famous or revered figure. Once per day, the master of the sanctum can summon forth a powerful undead guardian to defend the sanctum. The summoned creature can be of any type that the master of the sanctum desires, provided its CR is no greater than the total number of sanctum points invested in the sarcophagus. The summoned guardian loyally serves the master of the sanctum, as though it had been summoned by the spell *summon monster I*, except that it cannot leave the boundaries of the place of power. The summoned creature remains for a number of rounds equal to the number of sanctum points invested in the sarcophagus.

**Scrying Zone (workstation, 8 or more points):** This component can take the form of a still pool or a full-length mirror, and allows the master of the sanctum to observe another creature at a distance. Once per day, the master of the sanctum can use the scrying zone to view a creature as per the *scrying* spell, except that the saving throw DC for the effect is equal to 10 + the number of sanctum points invested in the scrying zone (plus any adjustments due to the master of the sanctum’s knowledge of and connection to the target, as per *scrying*). The *scrying* effect lasts for 1 hour per sanctum point invested in the scrying zone, or until the master of the sanctum ends the effect (a move action). If the target succeeds on his saving throw, it does not prevent the master of the sanctum from scrying on him using a *scrying* spell he casts himself.

**Skulls (accent, 2 points):** The bleached skulls of humanoids occupy this sanctum, and enhance the power of undeath. The master of the sanctum treats his caster level as 1 higher than it actually is for the purposes of all necromancy spells that he casts while in the sanctum. Additionally, all undead creatures within the sanctum gain a +1 profane bonus on attack and damage rolls as long as they remain within the sanctum.

**Spire (accent, 2 points):** This component is a short spire of stone, often engraved with runes or adorned with blood and blades. The master of the sanctum gains a +2 bonus on weapon damage rolls while within the sanctum. Other characters suffer a -2 penalty to AC while within the sanctum.

**Spirit Ward (threshold, 6 points):** This potent threshold denies incorporeal creatures entrance to the sanctum. Any incorporeal creature that attempts to enter the sanctum must succeed on a Will save (DC 10 + 1/2 the number of points invested in the entire sanctum) or be unable to enter the sanctum. A creature that fails this saving throw cannot try again for 24 hours.

**Stifling Heat (accent 4 points):** The air is filled with a searing heat within the place of power. Whenever the master of the sanctum casts a spell with the fire descriptor within the sanctum, if that spell deals damage, it deals an additional point of fire damage per damage die. Additionally, whenever another character enters the sanctum, and every minute thereafter, he must succeed on a Fortitude save (DC 10 + 1/2 the number of sanctum points invested in the entire sanctum) or be fatigued for 1 minute. A sanctum cannot have both chill air and stifling heat at the same time.

**Stone Circle (boundary, 12 or more points):** A circle of standing stones serves as the barrier to the sanctum. Though the stones can easily be walked between in order to gain entrance to the sanctum, powerful magic blocks unnatural creatures (aberrations, constructs, non-elemental outsiders, and undead) from entering, and such creatures are physically incapable of entering the sanctum unless they succeed on a Will save (DC 10 + 1/2 the number of sanctum points invested in the entire sanctum). A creature that fails this saving throw cannot try again for 24 hours. Even then, such creatures are not treated as being within the sanctum for the purposes of any benefits granted to characters within the sanctum. By default, a stone circle has a 10-ft. radius, but for every 2 additional points invested in the stone circle, the radius can be increased by up to 5 ft.

**Summoning Circle (workstation, 6 points):** A summoning circle is typically made of bronze, copper, or iron and is laid into the floor and etched with runes. A summoning circle has a radius of 5-ft., and occupies a 10-ft. square within the sanctum. Whenever the master of the sanctum casts a spell of the summoning subschool, if the creature that he summons arrives within the summoning circle, that creature receives a +2 bonus to its Strength, Dexterity, and Constitution scores for the duration of the spell that summoned it. Additionally, the summoning circle is treated as functioning as a *magic circle against chaos*, a *magic circle against evil*, a *magic circle against good*, and a *magic circle against law* for the purposes of containing creatures summoned with *lesser planar binding*, and similar spells, and the master of the sanctum gains a +2 bonus on all Charisma checks and Charisma-based skill checks made to influence a creature trapped within the circle in this way.

**Sweet Air (accent, 2 points):** The air within the sanctum is empowered by magic to be sweet and pleasant smelling, not unlike a bed of wildflowers. All spells and effects based on olfactory elements (such as *stinking cloud*, *cloudkill* , and the stench special ability) automatically fail within the sanctum. Finally, the master of the sanctum can breathe deeply of the sweet air in order to calm his nerves, granting him a constant +2 bonus on saving throws made to resist spells and abilities with the emotion descriptor for as long as he remains within the sanctum.

**Transport Circle (workstation, 10 or more points):** The borders of these enchanted zones are often represented by colorful tiles or rings of stones. A transport circle is 5 feet in diameter and occupies a single 5-ft. square in the sanctum. Whenever the master of the sanctum steps into the transport circle, he is transported, as though by the spell *greater teleport*, to a single, specific location that was chosen at the time that the transport circle was invested with sanctum points. For every 5 additional sanctum points invested in the transport circle, the master of the sanctum can choose an additional location that the transport circle can *greater teleport* him to. This transportation is one-way, although whenever the master of the sanctum uses a *teleport* spell, or any similar spell with a chance of arriving at the wrong destination, to travel to his transport circle, he automatically reaches the correct location.

**Walls (boundary, 1 or more points):** The walls surrounding a sanctum can be empowered to serve as its boundary. It costs 1 sanctum point to empower a 20-foot stretch of wall (*thus, creating a wall boundary for a 20-ft. by 20-ft. room would cost 4 sanctum points, a 30-ft. by 30-ft. room would cost 6 sanctum points, a 100-ft. by 100-ft. room would cost 25 points, etc.*). In addition to providing the borders of the place of power, a wall empowered in this way is magically strengthened against penetration. Its hardness is increased by 5 and it is immune to the spells *passwall*, *phase door*, *stoneshape* (or *wood shape*, if made of wood), and *transmute rock to mud*.

**White Candles (accent, 3+ points):** Made from white wax, these simple candles are tools attuned to divine magic. For the purposes of all divine spells that the master of the sanctum casts within the sanctum, he treats his caster level as being 1 higher than it actually is for every 3 sanctum points invested in the white candles. Other characters that cast divine spells within the sanctum treat their caster level as 1 higher than it actually is for every 6 sanctum points invested in the white candles for the purposes of such spells.

**Witch’s Cauldron (workstation, 3 points):** These gigantic cook pots are undoubtedly evil, and often contain the bones of the creatures brewed down into the vile grog which sustains their owners. The master of the sanctum can place a helpless living creature within the witch’s cauldron and apply heat sufficient for a normal cooking fire for a number of hours equal to the Hit Dice of the victim. If he does, the creature is boiled down into a glowing green grog which, when consumed, provides sufficient nutrition to constitute a week’s worth of food for one Medium creature. Additionally, if the cooked creature had an Intelligence score of 3 or higher, the grog provides the imbiber with the benefits of the *hero’s feast* spell.

**Wizard’s Alchemist Lab (workstation, 4 points):** This complex assortment of vials and alchemical ingredients is well-suited to any alchemical task. In addition to functioning as a standard alchemist’s lab, and granting a +4 competence bonus on Craft (alchemy) checks to any character that uses it to create an alchemical item, a wizard’s alchemist lab allows the master of the sanctum to make more powerful potions. If he uses the wizard’s alchemist lab to create a potion, the master of the sanctum can create potions that replicate the effects of 4th-level spells. These otherwise function as normal for potions, including the process used to create them.


---
## Tags
#Rule-System/Pathfinder #Rule/3PP #Publisher/Necromancers-of-the-Northwest #Sources/Advanced-Arcana-Vol--4 #Rule/OGL #Rule/fm3

