---
ImportedOn: "Friday, January 27, 2023 12:02:47 AM"
Aliases:
  - "Cold Fire"
Category: "Spells"
Tags:
  - "Category/Spells"
parent:
  - "C"
up:
  - "C"
prev:
  - "Cocoon (Spell)"
next:
  - "Cold Snap (Spell)"
RWtopicId: "Topic_12587"
---
# Cold Fire (Spell)
## Overview
[[Transmutation Spells|Transmutation]] \[[[Cold Spells|cold]]]

**Level:** [[1st Level Cleric Spells|Cleric 1]], [[1st Level Druid Spells|Druid 1]]

**BoXM:** [[BoXM 2nd-Level Cleric Spells List|Cleric 2]], [[BoXM 2nd-Level Druid Spells List|Druid 2]]

**Casting Time:** 1 standard action

**Components:** V, S, DF

**Range:** Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels)

**Target:** One fire source (up to a 20-ft. cube) or one creature; see text

**Duration:** 1 minute/level (D) (fire source) or Instantaneous (creature)

**Saving Throw:** None (fire source) or Fortitude half (creature)

**Spell Resistance:** No (fire source) or Yes (creature)

**Source:** Spell Compendium (WotC), pg. 50

*As you complete the spell you widen your eyes slightly at the fire you wish to affect. Its flames instantly turn a blue-white. The air between you and the fire feels much colder.*

You are able to change the normal flames of a fire (any blaze that lasts for more than 1 round) into cold flames. Affected flames deal cold damage to creatures that come into contact with them. The spell can also affect magical fires such as those generated by a *[[Wall of Fire (Spell)|wall of fire]]*, provided the affected fire is small enough. *Cold fire* flames burn blue and white for the duration of the spell.

If the target is a creature with the fire subtype or vulnerability to cold, the spell deals 1d6 points of cold damage per two caster levels (maximum 5d6) to the creature, but has no further effect.


---
## Tags
#Spell-Resistance/Yes #Sources/Spell-Compendium #Rule-System/Pathfinder #Saving-Throws/None #Rule/NonOGL #Rule/Spell #Rule/3PP #Publisher/WotC #Spell-Rarity/Rare #Spell-Resistance/No #Spell-Level/Cleric-1 #Spell-Range/Close--25-ft----5-ft--2-levels- #Spell-Descriptor/Cold #Spell-Level/Druid-1 #Saving-Throws/Fortitude-Half #Spell-School/Transmutation

