---
ImportedOn: "Friday, January 27, 2023 12:02:47 AM"
Aliases:
  - "Magnetism"
Category: "Spells"
Tags:
  - "Category/Spells"
parent:
  - "M"
up:
  - "M"
prev:
  - "Megalodon Empowerment (Spell)"
next:
  - "Mage Armor, Improved (Spell)"
RWtopicId: "Topic_911"
---
# Magnetism (Spell)
## Overview
[[Transmutation Spells|Transmutation]]

**Level:** [[6th Level Sorcerer Spells|Sorcerer 6]], [[6th Level Wizard Spells|Wizard 6]]

**BoXM:** [[BoXM 11th-Level Wizard Spells List|Wizard 11]]

**Casting Time:** 1 standard action

**Components:** V, S, M (a small lodestone)

**Range:** Medium (100 ft. + 10 ft./level)

**Targets:** One metallic creature or object

**Duration:** 1 minute/level (D)

**Saving Throw:** None

**Spell Resistance:** Yes

Source: Unapproachable East (WotC), pg. 49

You fire a brilliant blue ray at a single creature or object within range. If your ranged touch attack succeeds, you charge the target with an intensely powerful magical magnetism effect. You can only affect objects made of metal or creatures wearing or carrying metal armor, weapons, or gear.

The magical magnetism generated by *magnetism* creates a zone of attraction with a radius of 30 feet around the affected creature or object. Every metallic object entering the zone of attraction is pulled toward the target creature or object by this attractive force, which has an effective Strength score of 10 + the caster’s level (maximum 25). Every round metal creatures or objects remain within the zone of attraction, they must attempt an opposed Strength check against the force. If an attracted creature wins this contest, it suffers no ill effects this round. If it fails, it is [[Entangled|entangled]] and drawn 10 feet plus 1 foot for every point by which it failed the opposed Strength check closer to the creature or object at the center of the zone.

Creatures carrying or holding metal objects may choose to release them, in which case the items fly to the creature or object at the center, or hold onto them, in which case they are treated as metal creatures. Unattended metal objects of 50 pounds or less in the zone of attraction (including items voluntarily released, as well as metallic projectiles fired through the zone) fly with great force and strike the target, dealing 1d6 points of damage per 5 pounds of weight (maximum 10d6). Objects heavier than 50 pounds are dragged 10 feet closer each round.

Metal creatures or objects that reach the target of *magnetism* become stuck fast to the target. (If the target is a metal or metal-armored creature, it is instantly stuck fast to itself by the spell.) Creatures stuck together this way are considered to be [[Grappled|grappled]] and must first escape the grapple by defeating the attractive force in an opposed Strength check before they can try to move away or take any actions prohibited in a grapple. Similarly, an object stuck to the target must be wrested away with a Strength check before it can be used.

If a creature or object within the zone of attraction is more than twice as heavy as the target of *magnetism,* the target is dragged to it instead. This naturally moves the zone of attraction, which may shift other creatures into or out of the magnetism’s range of influence.

**GM Note**

*House Rule:* Name changed from *Ghorus Toth's magnetism* to *magnetism* for campaign continuity.


---
## Tags
#Spell-Resistance/Yes #Sources/Unapproachable-East #Rule-System/Pathfinder #Saving-Throws/None #Rule/NonOGL #Rule/3PP #Rule/Variant #Publisher/WotC #Rule/House-Rule #Spell-Range/Medium--100-ft----10-ft--level- #Spell-Level/Sorcerer-Wizard-6 #Spell-School/Transmutation

