---
ImportedOn: "Thursday, February 16, 2023 6:10:23 PM"
Category: "Artifacts"
Tags:
  - "Category/Artifacts"
parent:
  - "Artifacts"
up:
  - "Artifacts"
prev:
  - "Ring of Sorcerers"
next:
  - "Silver Sphere"
RWtopicId: "Topic_18202"
---
# The Siege Cannon
## Overview
*This massive cannon features a 12-foot-long and 2-foot-wide*

*iron barrel marked with brass fittings. Mounted on a wooden,*

*wheeled cradle, it can be maneuvered with a little effort. T here*

*is no clear firing mechanism, but inspection reveals a set of*

*human handprints on each side of the weapon and a third set at*

*the butt of the gun.*

**Aura** overwhelming evocation (DC 27); **CL** 25th

**Slot** none; **Weight** 5 tons

**DESCRIPTION**

Firing a *siege cannon* is not particularly easy, nor is it desirable, for

the weapon exacts a terrible price. The *cannon* draws its strength

from energy generated by mortal souls and those that have fired

these weapons are either incinerated by the weapon’s function or

laid up for months of recovery.

To activate these weapons, three living mortals must place their

hands into the hand-shaped depressions situated on either side

and at the weapon’s butt. The person at the cannon’s rear designates

the target, while those on either side supply the required energy.

Within seconds, the *cannon* fires, launching a ball of roiling white

fire to strike its target. The *cannon* has a range of about a half-mile

and when the flaming death strikes a solid object, it detonates in

a 40-foot radius, dealing 20d6 points of damage to all creatures

and objects in the area. The cannon also deals 4d6 points of fire

damage to the people touching the handprints. This damage cannot

be healed by any magical means short of a *limited wish*. It heals

naturally at a rate of 1 point per day of complete bed rest.

**LEGENDS**

Freeport’s secret weapons are its *siege cannon*. Discovered years ago

when the wreckage of a strange and otherworldly ship washed up

on the shores of the city, scavengers found five strange tube-like

devices of unknown purpose **(Knowledge—history DC 25)**. For

years, the best minds in the city labored to deduce exactly what

these things were, and while there were a variety of theories,

nothing was certain. The only thing they knew for sure was that

they were weapons of some sort, but their effects and the means

to generate them remained a mystery **(DC 20)**. It wasn’t until

the city came under attack by a fleet of Continental warships

their theories were tested. While the stalwart Freeporters fought

for their lives, the wise men that had toiled and argued over the

cannon went to work and soon after, one of their theories proved

correct. Spewing out from its barrel was a ball of white-hot fire that

shone like the sun and streaked toward the enemy fleet. The ship

it struck exploded with a brilliant flash and when people’s vision

returned, there was little left of the target except for flaming debris

and falling ashes. With that one shot, the fleet quit the battle and

fled the harbor and the Serpent’s Teeth **(DC 15)**.

**DESTRUCTION**

The *siege cannon* can be destroyed by targeting it for 24 hours with

fifth level or higher spells bearing the cold descriptor. This barrage

of cold spells must be non–stop for the entire period; even a single

round without an active cold spell means the attempt will have

no effect.


---
## Tags
#Sources/Freeport-Companion #Rule-System/Pathfinder #Rule/Artifact #Rule/3PP #Publisher/Green-Ronin

