---
ImportedOn: "Thursday, February 16, 2023 6:10:23 PM"
Aliases:
  - "Glowing Orb"
Category: "Spells"
Suffix: "Spell"
Tags:
  - "Category/Spells"
parent:
  - "G"
up:
  - "G"
prev:
  - "Grimoire Symbiosis (Spell)"
next:
  - "Golem Immunity (Spell)"
RWtopicId: "Topic_13372"
---
# Glowing Orb (Spell)
## Overview
[[Evocation Spells|Evocation]] \[[[Light Spells|light]]]

**Level:** [[4th Level Cleric Spells|Cleric 4]], [[3rd Level Sorcerer Spells|Sorcerer 3]], [[3rd Level Wizard Spells|Wizard 3]]

**BoXM:** [[BoXM 8th-Level Cleric Spells List|Cleric 8]], [[BoXM 6th-Level Wizard Spells List|Wizard 6]]

**Casting Time:** 1 standard action

**Components:** V, S, F

**Range:** Touch

**Effect:** Magical, controllable light source

**Duration:** Permanent

**Saving Throw:** None

**Spell Resistance:** No

**Source:** Spell Compendium (WotC), pg. 106

*Calling on the limitless light of the Positive Energy Plane, you coax a tiny portion of its power into a fragile glass sphere.*

This spell places a magical light source inside a glass sphere roughly the size of a human fist. You can control the light-level generated by a glowing orb by mental command (a standard action), provided that the orb is within 30 feet of you. The light level ranges from no light at all to illumination within a 60-foot radius. There is no limit to the number of glowing orbs you can possess, and you can control their light levels independently or in concert.

If a glowing orb is smashed, the magic is lost. If you die, however, an orb retains its magic. Any character with an Intelligence or Wisdom of at least 13 can gain control of an orb simply by touching it.

*Focus:* A glass sphere (50 gp) into which the light is placed. An orb usable for this purpose has hardness 0 and 2 hit points.


---
## Tags
#Spell-Resistance/No #Rule-System/Pathfinder #Saving-Throws/None #Rule/NonOGL #Rule/Spell #Publisher/WotC #Rule/3PP #Sources/Spell-Compendium #Spell-Level/Cleric-4 #Spell-School/Evocation #Spell-Descriptor/Light #Spell-Level/Sorcerer-Wizard-3 #Spell-Range/Touch #Spell-Rarity/Rare

